{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deftab720{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss MS Sans Serif;}{\f1\froman\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\froman Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss Arial;}}
{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;}
\deflang1033\pard\plain\f2\fs24 #$>@K\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.1 General
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par \pard\plain\f3\fs20 The zone constants are variables defined for each zone which reflect the characteristics of the zone. These variables can change from one zone to another but will remain constant for each nightflow analysis undertaken for a specific zone.
\par 
\par \{bmct Constants Start.bmp\}
\par The zone constants are:
\par \tab Zone reference (\'a71.2)ZONEREFERENCE
\par \tab Background loss parameters for:
\par \tab \tab Mains (\'a71.3.1)MAINSLOSSPARAMETER
\par \tab \tab Connections (\'a71.3.2)CONNECTIONSLOSSPARAMETER
\par \tab \tab Installations (or properties - \'a71.3.3)INSTALLATIONLOSSPARAMETER#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.2 Zone Reference
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par The zone reference provides a unique reference label to each zone. It can contain numbers and/or letters and can be of any length although the menu box will only display ???? characters at one time. Typical examples are:
\par \tab ZONE0014
\par \tab WATERKLOOF.01A#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.3.1 Mains Loss Parameters (MLP)
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par This parameter defines the level of leakage occuring from the mains pipes which are effectively all pipes from which individual connections are made. Values for the Mains Loss Parameter are typically between 20 l/km/hr for relatively new pipes in a sound condition to 60 l/km/hr for older pipes which are showing signs of deterioration - all at standard pressure of 50m.
\par #$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.3.2 Connections Loss Parameter (CLP)
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par This parameter defines the level of leakage occuring from each connection. The connection is considered to be the joint at the mains pipe plus all pipes and fittings to the property boundary which may or may not include the water meter. The default value is 40 l/km/hr.
\par 
\par Typical values of CLP are between 1 litre per connection per hour to 5 l/conn/hr at standard pressure of 50m
\par 
\par The user should select a value in accordance with the quality of the pipework and age of the system. The default value is 3 l/conn/hr.#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.3.3 Installation Loss Parameter (ILP)
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par This parameter defines the leakage occuring from the property boundary to the property plus the internal plumbing losses. In areas where internal plumbing losses are under control the value of the ILP is generally between 0.5l/installation/hr and 5l/installation/hr. The default value of 1l/installation/hr assumes that 50% of the leakage is internal and 50% external.
\par 
\par In many parts of South Africa the internal plumbing losses are not small and in fact dominate the nightflow calculation. In such cases it is often possible to estimate the internalk plumbing losses directly from the measured minimum nightflow. If the plumbing losses are high, they should be addressed before the SANFLOW model can be used to predict the number of unreported bursts.
\par #$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.4.1 General
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par Pressure has a significant influence on the leakage from a system and this must be taken into account when comparing nightflow measurements from different zones as well as for the same zone at a different time. In order to overcome the problem of incompatibility of results between nightflow analyses at different operating pressures, a standard pressure of 50m is used as a benchmark. Pressure correction factors are applied to the various leakage estimates to take the pressure differences into account.
\par 
\par The pressure correction factor is used as follows:
\par 
\par FLOWp1 = FLOW50 * (P1/50)POWER where,
\par \tab FLOWp1 = flow rate at operating pressure P1 (m\'b3/hr)
\par \tab FLOW50 = flow rate at standard pressure of 50m (m\'b3/hr)
\par \tab POWER = power law index (usually between 0.5 and 1.5)
\par 
\par For example, if the operating pressure is 63m and a power law index of 1.5 is accepted, the scaling factor (ie (P1/50)^POWER) will be 1.414 which indicates that the leakage at 63m is 1.414 times greater than the leakage at 50m of pressure. The selection of the POWER variable is discussed in sections 1.4.2 and 1.4.3.
\par 
\par 
\par #$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.4.2 Background Leakage Power Index (BLPI)
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par The selection of the appropriate power index for background leakage is a very subjective issue and one in which there are many different views. In general it is usually assumed that background leakage from a water supply network occurs mainly through the joints and connections. As the pressure increases, the joints expand to give a larger loss area with the result that the water losses are not linear with respect ot the pressure. This is considered to be the case especially with plastic/PVC pipes and fittings. It is suggested that a value of 1.5 be used in cases where plastic pipes are used and a value of 1.0 in cases where steel or concrete pipes are used.
\par 
\par Default value for BLPI = 1.5#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.4.3 Burst Leakage Power Index (BUPLI)
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par A burst pipe is usually a physical break or hole in a pipe which results in losses in excess of 0.25m\'b3/hr (UK standard 0.5m\'b3/hr). In the case of a hole in a pipe, the size of the opening remains constant at different pressures and does not increase with pressure. In such cases an index of 0.5 is considered to be realistic and a value of between 0.5 and 1.0 is normally selected.
\par 
\par Default value of BUPLI = 0.5#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.5.3 Grouped Night Use
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par A form is provided to take account of other small night users such as caf\'e9s, garages, etc. Any grouping can be included together with the number in each group and the hourly use of water per unit. For example we may have 8 all night garages using 30l/hr plus 4 all night caf\'e9s using 10l/hr in which case the total grouped night use will be 280l/hr (8*30 + 4*10)#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.5.1 General
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par During the period when the minimum night flow is measured, there are likely to be some legitimate users of water which must be taken into consideration. There may be nightworkers who work shifts, all night garages, schools with automatic flushing toilets, hospitals, hotels, industries, etc all of which may use water throughout the night. In the case of the population based night use it is assumed that most of the water is used through toilet flushing.
\par 
\par Since it is not possible to check every meter during the night flow measurement exercise, the quantity of water used is estimated based upon various assumptions.
\par 
\par The SANFLOW model splits the legitimate night use into three components, which are discussed individually in sections 1.5.2, 1.5.3 and 1.5.4.
\par \tab Normal population based night use (\'a71.5.2)POPULATIONBASEDNIGHTUSE
\par \tab Grouped night use (caf\'e9s, garage, etc. \'a71.5.3)GROUPEDNIGHTUSE
\par \tab Individually metered night use (schools, airports, hotels, etc \'a71.5.4)METEREDNIGHTUSE
\par #$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.5.2 Population Based Night Use
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par In order to estimate the population based night use, certain items must be defined. Obviously the population in the zone is of primary importance after which the percentage of the population who flush the toilet during any hour is a key parameter. Finally, the volumne of the standard toilet cistern is needed to give the total volumne used by the population in any one hour.
\par 
\par In Europe it is generally accepted that 6% of the population are active during the night anf that the average toilet flush is 10 litres. In South Africa it is considered realistic to use 3%.#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.5.4 Metered Night Use
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par In cases where a large water user is located in the zone it is often necessary to record the actual water use during the night flow exercise. A form is included for such users which requires only a short description of the user as well as their hourly water use. The water use of such users is added to provide the total metered night use.#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 2.3 Measurement Date
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par This refers to the date of the nightflow measurement and is selected throught the small calendar form via the main Zone Infrastructure Variable FormZONEVARIABLESGENERAL. Since the date can only be inserted using the calendar sub-form there is no possibilty of using the incorrect format.#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 1.6 Equivalent Service Pipe Bursts
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par The output from SANFLOW is generally given as the excess night flow which cannot be explained or accounted for. This excess flow obviously incorporates any erros associated with the assumptions made in the calculation as well as the water lost through burst pipes. In order to place the excess night flow into perspective and for comparison with other zones, it is also expressed in terms of Equivalent Service Pipe Bursts. Practice has shown that most of the burst pipes are on the service pipes (ie the installations and connections) which generally result in leakage of approximately 1.6m\'b3/hr at standard pressure. A default value of 1.6m\'b3/hr is used in the model although this can be changed if considered appropriate.#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 2.1 General
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par The zone infrastructure variables are grouped seperately since they can be changed from one night flow measurement to another although many of the variables will remain unchanged throughout the year. the variables are discussed individually in sections 2.2 to 2.9#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 2.2 Night Flow Reference Number
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par This number is simply a reference for the given night flow analysis and is effectively only used for "cosmetic" purposes since the Zone Reference NumberZONEREFERENCE and Measurement Date will uniquely define a specific nightflow anlysis.#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 2.4 Average Night Zone Pressure (AZNP)
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par The average zone night pressure is as the name suggests the weighted average pressure throughout the zone during the period over which the minimum night flow measurement was taken. Details of how to calculate AZNP are provided in the main user guide.#$>@\plain\f3\fs20\b 2.5 Measured Minimum Night Flow
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par The measured minimum night flow is the basic information on which the night flow analysis is based. The minimum night flow is either measured manually from the meter by recording the gauge reading each hour or taken from an automatic logger record. The minimum night flow is expressed in m\'b3/hr and represents the minimum hourly flow entering a zone. The value recorded comprises three elements which can be broken down as follows:
\par \tab Assessed Night Use
\par \tab \tab Population night usePOPULATIONBASEDNIGHTUSE
\par \tab \tab Grouped Night UseGROUPEDNIGHTUSE
\par \tab \tab Metered Night UseMETEREDNIGHTUSE
\par \tab Background Losses
\par \tab \tab Mains losses
\par \tab \tab Connection losses
\par \tab \tab Installation losses
\par \tab Unexplained Night Use (ie bursts)\plain\f2\fs20 
\par }
 